Liam Greene Philip Slaby Hist 237 December 10, 2021 The Motives and Effects of European “New” Imperialism on the Congo European imperialism was filled with extreme brutality and violence that had long-lasting effects on the native people that were the targets of this “New” Imperialism. The first appearance of European imperialism was in the sixteenth century, where the Atlantic Slave Trade began. Many new Europeans built stations along the west coast of Africa to trade and acquire slaves from neighboring African communities. In 1575, as the slave trade economy has risen, a nobleman convinced Portugal to form an official colony in Angola, south of the Congo. This colony flourished during the slave trade era, with many ports and countries shipping goods to the colony. This colony thrived until the abolishment of the slave trade in the 1840s. This colony was the first taste of European Imperialism in Africa and around the Congo. King Leopold II, the Belgium monarch, had long wanted a private colony to himself separate from a government. “He was enthralled by the remarkable story of the British Brooke family, who had become the Rajahs of Sarawak on the far eastern island of Borneo” and desired to rule over either a private colony in Asia or Africa.  During the 1870s, he became intrigued by the writings of the explorer Verney Lovett Cameron and journalist H.M. Stanley. Their explorations and writings described a region in west-central Africa around the Congo River. In 1876, King Leopold called a meeting with different geographers and people interested in Africa and created the International Africa Association. This group was supposed to be dedicated to a “humanitarian development of Africa”.  This group started collecting treaties from African chiefs by the early 1880s. Treaties were a large method in imperializing and exploiting Africa, as European explorers would trick African kings and chiefs into signing their land away or into exploitive economic deals. French explorers also drew up treaties with African chiefs, which were all accepted by the French government in 1882. Britain was also interested in the Congo area, and attempted to support Portuguese claims to the land, however the trading interests of the British did not align with the Portuguese and those attempts to block the Congo for themselves fell through. Germany had not been active in the Partition of Africa, but in 1884, Bismarck gave into the pressure and called a conference in Berlin. This conference did little to stem the chaos ensuing in Africa but did establish some rules and create borders. On February 23, 1885, the Congo Independent State was officially created. This agreement and creation of the Congo Independent State made King Leopold the absolute ruler of the new state. This creation of the Congo Independent State was an international zone and had to allow anyone or company to settle or trade in the Congo basin. This act of imperialism on the Congo area began to affect the surrounding African communities, drawing in more slave traders, exploiting many native villages and people, causing mass amounts of death and abuse, and more lasting effects of this “New” European imperialism prevalent around the Congo area. As the European countries rose in industrial power and were selling their goods slower than they could produce them, they sought a different and new market for their goods. Many European countries looked to Africa to colonize and sell their good produced in Europe. Many justified the violent imperialism of Africa, saying that “expansion is a necessity of life to a nation with our great and growing powers of production”.  Others justified the imperialism of these African villages and regions by describing imperialism as a purely economic action, taken just for profits and new foreign markets. Many European countries were claiming land and making colonies in Africa. These colonies cut off the trade and access to the region colonized by a different country. The other European countries saw these opportunities for profit and a new market for their growing production and clamored for land to occupy, trade with, and sell their growing production of goods to. Many European countries competed with each other for land, and some engaged in conflict. This “new” Imperialism pushed European countries against each other to fight for land and foreign markets for their goods. The European imperialists did not look at the treatment of the African natives or care about the consequences their actions had on the native people. Many European countries were motivated to colonize Africa once they saw other countries claiming region for themselves. This connects with a growing feeling of nationalism and national pride, with the focus on claiming the most land and having more control over Africa than other countries. This push to beat out other countries and join the partition of Africa was rooted in the rising nationalism throughout Europe. The fear that they will miss out on a new market or be the only country not to imperialize motivated some countries to join in on the partition of Africa and the “new” imperialism. Belgium was one of the top industrial powers of the ninetieth century and one of the motivations for imperializing the Congo was to expand its market and sell the excess production to the natives. This production is something they can trade for certain in demand items such as ivory and slaves to the native kingdoms in Africa. Another motivation for the colonization and imperialism of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is the need to civilize or improve the native societies in Africa. This motivation to civilize and impose the European beliefs and religion was mainly associated with race and Europeans being dominate over the Africans. The “White Man’s Burden” by Rudyard Kipling is a great example of the motivation to civilize African communities. “Send forth the best ye breed-/ Go bind your sons to exile / To serve your captives' need;”.  This poem was used to call Europeans to send their best citizens to teach the native people targeted by European imperialism how to be civil and conform to European society. This motivation to assimilate and force native people into European society effects many native communities for many years after imperialism. This motivation to civilize and impose European culture on the Natives lead to a growth in racism and the belief of a hierarchy of race, with many Europeans believing they were the dominate race, which has led to long lasting effects throughout society still prevalent in today’s culture. Europeans used various methods to conquer the Congo and claim the region. The start of the interactions between Europeans and native Africans was in the sixteenth century, when slave trade became popular. Once slave trade was abolished, Europeans looked for new sources of income and goods. The Portuguese discovered they could acquire Ivory from trading with a hunting group called the Cokwe. Caravans of Portuguese traders travelled with these people as they hunted the elephants. Travelling north, the caravans and Cokwe people discovered a large community known and Kuba. “Schütt’s book brought the first word about the existence of a Kuba kingdom to Europe and right with it a first stereotype of Kuba as cannibals”.  Word travelled back to the Portuguese colony and to other Europeans and the native Africans were stereotyped as cannibals by the Europeans. This effected how many Europeans saw Africans and how they interacted with them. This stereotype about native Africans can be connected back to the motivation described in Rudy Kipling’s “The White Man’s Burden”, depicting Africans as inferior and savage. This method of depicting native Africans was a main way of justifying the harsh violence of European “new” imperialism. In the early 1880s, King Leopold II had sent out an exploration team in the Congo region around the Kasai River. A new settlement called Malanje was created by people from the original Portuguese colony, Angola. This settlement cast a big cultural influence over the neighboring African villages, who marveled at the achievements of the Europeans. In 1885, the Congo Independent State was officially recognized as King Leopold II pushed for it in the Berlin Conference. Before the Congo Independent State became official, Leopold set up an International African Association to explore the continent. “Leopold established independently the Association Internationale du Congo, ostensibly a benevolent organization but in fact a vehicle through which Leopold, the Association ’s sole shareholder, could enrich himself”.  Establishing the International African Association was a method Leopold used lay claim to the Congo region and disguise his true agenda to be the independent ruler of the Congo. Leopold enlisted the help of Henry Morton Stanley, who had traversed the Congo River and explored central Africa. Stanley set up central governments in different parts of the Congo region. He signed many treaties with African chiefs and built an important road connecting two regions of the Congo. Stanley used new steamboat technology to travel the Congo River and set up posts along it. Steamboats were a crucial part in the colonization of the Congo, as it allowed explorers and troops to travel the rivers in the Congo quickly and materials to be transported quickly through the region when constructing infrastructure. The International African Association created a Committee for Study of the Upper Congo with a purpose to “promote the idea of a federal state to unite the peoples of the Congo and to bring them the blessings of European civilization”.  Many different expeditions and explores travelled the Congo and the Kasai Rivers, and found they connected. In 1886, King Leopold built a Congo Independent State army known as the Force Publique. It was not very big with about only six thousand in 1900. This army, however, did have superior weaponry to the native Africans and was used by Leopold to conquer and control the Congo region. The Force Publique was a critical piece in controlling the Congo Independent State. As the military of the Congo Independent State, the Force Publique enforced labor from the native Africans and carried out extreme violence against them to subdue revolts against the European colonists. The rivers were an important part of the conquering and control of the Congo Independent State, as troops and travelers moved through the region quickly using the river system of the Congo. Different posts went up along the rivers as the region started to become a European hotspot for trade. One condition of the Congo Independent State was that it was an international zone, and no tariffs or restrictions were to be placed on any trade. This negatively impacted the economy of the Congo region, driving king Leopold to look towards the newly discovered rubber and ivory. The free trade zone established in the Congo caused King Leopold to seek other means of economic gain than trade and tariffs on other Europeans. The fiscal difficulty caused King Leopold to take drastic and violent actions towards the native African communities to maximize profit. This beginning to the rubber and ivory trade greatly impacts the native African villages and kingdoms soon to be violently exploited for profit. Europeans first arrived in the sixteenth century, looking for communities to trade goods from Europe for slaves. They did not largely focus on the vast kingdoms ruling over the Congo region. Once European imperialism targeted Africa, explorers set out to map the regions of Africa. As King Leopold started to lay claim to the Congo region and develop the Congo Independent State, unrest and distain for the new European presence was evident in the many villages, traders, and communities. Outside the main region of the Congo Independent State, also known as the Arab zone, many regions where large kingdoms had been resisted. The Zande kingdom in the north, the Yaka in the west, and the Luba in the south-central region of the Congo. Even the Chokwe people, who first traded ivory with the Portuguese resisted the new commercial connections to the Congo Independent State. The government of the Independent State never got legitimacy in the view of the native people. Africans viewed the Europeans “as ‘creatures’ from the sea, a notion which was common to the Tukolors and Zulus as well as the Congolese” and did not see their victories as legitimate because they considered the Europeans to be using “witchcraft or magic” to win battles.  This view the natives had of the Europeans prevented them from ever accepting European rule, and while Europeans ruled the region, they were not considered legitimate by their subjects. This rejection of the legitimacy of the European rule over the Congo region was a large factor in the harshness of the Europeans and their troops towards the native African villages. The many revolts were in resistance to the European rule and harsh labor system placed on the natives and were met with more violence from the Europeans, causing irreplaceable damage and lots of native casualties. When the Congo Independent State became official at the Berlin Conference in 1885, there was a constraint. The Congo region was to be an international zone, where anyone is allowed, such as traders, settlers, and travelers. This condition greatly stunted the economy of the Congo Independent State, as Leopold and his government in the Congo could not enact tariffs or taxes on the traders in the region. This lack of control hurt the growth of the Congo Independent State, until they found a new way to obtain profit from the Congo. However, before they could obtain the profit from this region, it had to be developed and infrastructure had to be built. Labor was the hardest to obtain, especially since the relations with the native people were fractured and hostile. The administrators in Boma, where the central government was located, created a system of forced labor “under which Africans were rounded up by the Force Publique and turned over to special African overseers called sentilles who enforced work quotas with shotguns and rhinoceros-hide whips”.  This system implemented by the Congo Independent State central government rivals that of slavery. The harsh system put an immense amount of pressure on the Congolese men, having to harvest resources for the Europeans or be punished harshly. “To gather rubber, Congolese men spent weeks in the bush. They carried out the work at a time when they were most stressed and lived on wild roots and vegetables, a way of eking out a living that had previously supplemented subsistence farming”.  The Congolese men spend long spans of time under immense pressure harvesting resources and having to rely on small amounts of food for energy. The central government put this system in place because they wanted to collect large gains and build up the Congo Independent State as a large source of profit for King Leopold and Belgium as they could not make revenue from other countries trading through the area. Another way the Congo Independent State got natives to work for them is that they placed large taxes on the natives. When the natives could not pay the taxes in cash, they were ordered to pay in ivory, or rubber. When Africans resisted, the Force Publique would burn down their village, kill their women and children, and take many of the men to use as slaves. The central government implemented a quota into the work system. These quotas were set extremely high and set up the Africans to fail. When the African workers failed, they were whipped. In some drastic cases, their hands were cut off. This exploitation of the Africans and the force and brutality used to employ their labor was motivated by the economic gains. This labor was used to harvest rubber, a growing product in Europe and America that is used for insulating wires for electricity. Rubber was also important because of the use of rubber on the wheels of bicycles and cars, which were starting to be produced. The central government of the Congo Independent State disregarded the lives of the native people and forced them into slavery or indentured work for the sole purpose of collecting profit from the Congo. However, this treatment did get back to Europe. The treatment sparked international cries for change and a stop to this treatment of native Africans. The Congo Independent State regime’s atrocities were exposed and eventually King Leopold had to give up control of the Congo region to the Belgium government in 1908. The exploitation and violent means the central government were a harsh and drastic example of the brutality and violence of the Europeans when imperializing and colonizing Africa. The Europeans, and especially the central government of the Congo Independent State, showed how they disregarded the lives of the native African. They prioritized profit and a foreign market to sell their excess goods over the lives and treatment of Africans, revealing the force and true motivations of “New” Imperialism. As European imperialism and colonization in Africa became known around Europe, many journalists and philosophers critiqued the violent actions of the Europeans against the native Africans. The Europeans brutally exploited the Africans for profit and labor, disregarding their lives and communities. Edward Morel, a British journalist, wrote a critique of imperialism called “The Black Man’s Burden” which was a response to the famous poem, “The White Man’s Burden”. Morel spells out the horrible effects of Imperialism and occupation of African lands. “It attacks the African at every turn, from every point of vantage. It wrecks his polity, uproots him from the land, invades his family life, destroys his natural pursuits and occupations, claims his whole time, enslaves him in his own home”.  The European presence and violence in the Congo was one of the more infamous cases of imperialism, garnering a lot of attention and backlash from the hellish conditions the Africans were under. Many other journalists and philosophers also disagreed with the conditions Africans had to endure. “By 1900, international protest these atrocities increased, led by British activists like E. D. Morel and Sir Roger Casement”. The Congo Independent State was an extreme example of the violence used to imperialize Africa, and “the power of modern capitalistic exploitation”.  Eventually, in 1908, outcry and backlash against the Congo Independent State made the Belgian government take control of the region. This did not solve may problems, for the distain of the Europeans was still strong in the Africans living in the Congo region. The harsh and immoral ways the Europeans colonized the Congo left lasting effects on the native Africans living in the region. Europeans exploited many Africans, forcing them into labor or King Leopold’s private army, the Force Publique. The labor system set up by the central government of the Congo Independent State was harsh and violent, with huge repercussions if the Africans resisted, such as burning their village. The European imperialists exploited and killed the native Africans for profit and control of the Congo region. As this brutality became known to the European public, many called for justice and the end to this violence. Even though the Belgian government took control of the Congo, they still did not treat the native Africans well, and many other colonies in Africa exploited the native Africans for profit. Many journalists and philosophers condemned the actions of the European imperialists, calling them brutal and blood thirsty, but imperialism and European involvement in Africa was still prevalent for the next century, causing Africans to suffer the effects of European imperialism for generations.